---
layout: post
description: Spring 2022 Syllabus of ENVE 471 Solid and Hazardous Waste Management
categories: [markdown]
title: ENVE 471 S22 Syllabus
---

# ENVE 471 Solid and Hazardous Waste Management (Spring 2022)
## Course Description
Solid and Hazardous Waste Management Examines the principles of integrated solid waste management. Provides an overview of municipal solid waste (MSW), industrial waste and hazardous waste management, including design and economic analysis. Explores the planning and engineering principles needed to address the growing and increasingly intricate problem of controlling and processing the refuse (solid waste) created by urban societies. Discuss options such as landfilling, composting and incineration from engineering, social, and regulatory perspectives. Reviews physical, chemical, and biological treatment of hazardous waste. Covers federal regulations, permitting and public participation processes and innovative management practices associated with solid and hazardous waste. 

## Student Learning Outcomes
1. Identify key sources, typical quantities generated, composition, and properties of solid and hazardous waste
1. Identify waste disposal or transformation techniques (landfills and incinerators)
1. Recognize the relevant regulations that apply for facilities used for disposal and destruction of waste
1. Introduce Solid anad Hazardous Waste Landfills (RCRA Subtitle D and C)
1. Estimate typical waste disposal costs
1. Identify recycling and reuse options (composting, source separation, etc.)

## Grading

|Percent|Grading Items|
|-|-|
|40%|Homework|
|20%|Exam #1|
|20%|Exam #2|
|20%|Exam #3|
|100%||

## Text
### Required
G. Tchobanoglous, H. Theisen, S. Vigil, 1993. [Integrated Solid Waste Management: Engineering Pricinples and Management Issues](https://www.amazon.com/Integrated-Solid-Waste-Management-Engineering/dp/0070632375). McGraw-Hill Publishers. ISBN: 0070632375. 
### Reference
M.D. LaGrega, P.L. Buckingham, J.C. Evans, 2000. [Hazardous Waste Management](https://www.abebooks.com/book-search/isbn/0070393656/), 2nd edition. McGraw-Hill Publishers. ISBN: 0070393656. 

## Meeting Time
Tuesday 5:00-7:50 pm (149 Weyandt)

## Course Instructor
***H. Larry Tang, Ph.D., P.E.***   
Associate Professor of Environmental Engineering   
Environmental Engineering Program Coordinator   
Department of Chemistry, Biochemistry, Physics, and Engineering   
Phone: 724-357-7925   
Email: [htang@iup.edu](mailto:htang@iup.edu)   
Web: [http://waterprofessor.github.io/web](http://waterprofessor.github.io/web)

**Office Hours**   
M 7:50P-8:50P (in-person only)   
T 3:35P-4:50P (zoom and in-person), 7:50P-8:50P (in-person only)   
W 10:00A-11:15A (zoom and in-person), 4:50P-5:20P (in-person only)   

Zoom Room ID: **910 636 5162**   
Zoom link: [http://iupvideo.zoom.us/j/9106365162](http://iupvideo.zoom.us/j/9106365162). 

## Tentative Class Schedule

|Week|Date|Subject|Read|
|-|-|-|-|
|1|1/18|Introduction; Sources and types of solid waste|Ch 1,2|
|2|1/25|Composition and physical properties of solid waste|Ch 3|
|3|2/1|Chemical and biological properties of solid waste|Ch 4|
|4|2/8|Estimation of solid waste quantities; Practices on examples|Ch 6|
|5|2/15|Collection rates; In-class Exam #1|Ch 6|
|6|2/22|Handling, separation, storage, and processing at the source|Ch 7|
|7|3/1|Waste collection systems|Ch 8|
|8|3/8|Layout Design of collection routes|Ch 8|
|9|3/15|Spring Break, No Class||
|10|3/22|Separation, processing, and transformation of solid waste|Ch 9|
|11|3/29|Transfer and transport of solid waste; Practices on examples|Ch 10|
|12|4/5|The landfill method; In-class Exam #2|Ch 11|
|13|4/12|Estimation of landfill gases; Landfill leachate management|Ch 11|
|14|4/19|Hazaroud Waste fundamentals; Fate and transport of contaminants|Ch 5|
|15|4/26|Toxicology, treatment and disposal methods|Handout|
|16|5/3|Exam Week (Take-home Exam #3)|-|

## Attendance
The University uses the class method of teaching, which assumes that each student has something to contribute and something to gain by attending class. It further assumes that there is much more instruction absorbed in the classroom than can be tested on exams. Therefore, students are expected to attend all regularly scheduled class meetings and should exhibit good faith in this regard. For the control of absences, the instructor adopts the following regulations:
- 3 absences may result in an automatic failure in the course. 
- 2 tardy arrivals may be counted as one absence. 

## Homework
There will be a homework assigment after each class, due at the beginning of the next class meeting. Penalties for homework handed in late are:
- One day or less: 30% off
- 2-3 days: 50% off
- $\gt$ 3days: no credit

## Exams
For the two in-class exams, a single sheet of paper may be brougt to the exam with any equations, information, worked problems, etc. the student feels useful. The paper may be typed or handwritten, and both sides may be used. ***No make-up exams will be given*** except documented illness or conflicted schedule and by prior arrangement with the instructor, at least, one week before the scheduled exam time. 

Exam #3 is a take-home exam. It allows no discussion with your peers. 

## Grade Policy
For any graded assignment, if you do not agree with the grade received, the instructor must be notified within one week after the assignment is graded. Any request made more than one week after the grading dated will not be considered, no matter whose oversight. 

## Academic Integrity
The IUP Undergraduate Catalogue discussesl academic integrity and honesty, and outlines procedures and penalties for violations of IUP policy. If you are caught cheating or assisting someone in cheating, you will receive a 0% on that activity and will not be allowed to make up that activity. 

## Title IX Statement
Indiana University of Pennsylvania and its faculty are committed to assuring a safe and productive educational environment for all students. In order to meet this commitment and to comply with Title IX of Education Amendments of 1972 and guidance from the Office of Civil Rights, the University requires faculty members to report incidents of sexual violence shared by students to the University's Title IX Coordinator. The only exceptions to the faculty member's reporting obligation are when incidents of sexual violence are communicated by a student during a classroom discussion, in a writing assignment for a class, or as part of a University-approved research project. Faculty members are obligated to report sexual violence or any other abuse of a student who was, or is, a child (a person under 18 years of age) when the abuse allegedly occurred to the Department of Human Services (1-800-932-0313) and University Police (724-357-2141). Information regarding the reporting of sexual violence and the resources that are available to victims of sexual violence is set forth at: [http://www.iup.edu/socialequity/policies/title-ix](http://www.iup.edu/socialequity/policies/title-ix). 