---
layout: post
description: Spring 2022 Syllabus of ENVE 498 Environmental Engineerng Design
categories: [markdown]
title: ENVE 498 S22 Syllabus
---

# ENVE 498 Environmental Engineering Design (Spring 2022)
## Course Description
A Type II Writing Intensive course. Serve as  a culminating capstone design experience for environmental engineering seniors. Involves individualized engineering projects with frequent student-instructor interactions. Students learn to use various design concepts and apply the advanced level mathematics, science, and engineering skills learnt from other courses to solve real-world engineering problems. Students should complete and successfully defend their design reports. Completion of this course will prepare environmental engineering seniors for fulfillment of program objectives. 

## Learning Objectives
1. Students will learn and demonstrate the ability to apply knowledge of mathematics, chemistry, microbiology courses, as well as environmental engineering courses in this capstone design course. 
1. Students will learn and demonstrate the ability to design environmental systems (e.g., design a drinking water treatment plant, retrofit a wastewater treatment plant, etc.) which meet the design criteria and regulations. 
1. Students will learn the ability to function in a multidiscplinary team through the design project. 
1. Students will learn and demonstrate the ability to identify, formulate, and solve problems related to water quality and treatment, water resources and hydraulics, waste handling and disposal, hazardous waste and environmental safety through the capstone design project. 
1. The course will provide students with an understanding of professional and ethical responsibility through the design project. 
1. Students will learn and demonstrate the ability to communicate effectively through team work, report writing, and project oral presentation. Students are required to provide written reports for their design projects and they are also required to orally defend their project designs. 
1. Students will learn the ability to recognize the need for, and the ability to engage in life-long learning through their design projects. 
1. Students will learn knowledge of contemporary issues in the environmental engineering field (e.g., nutrient problems in Chesapeake Bay, membrane processes and UV disinfection, current and future regulations, design criteria, etc.)
1. Students will learn the ability to use the various treatment techniques, computer technologies, and other modern engineering tools necessary for engineering practice. 

## Prerequisite
Senior standing (90 or more credits) or instructor permission

## Recommended Preparation
Students must be enrolled in the B.S. Environmental Engineering Program and have an approved environmental engineering project proposal, with topics assigned by a faculty member or an external advisor - a professional engineer from an industrial affiliate of the Program. 

## Course Notes
The preparation and defense of project design report is the culminating experience in the B.S. Environmental Engineering Program. Students are expected to work with a high level of self-motivation. Successful students exercise initiative and exhibit strong communication skills in working with the course instructor. The course requires individual effort that is overseen by the course instructor. Weekly or bi-weekly meetings will be held with the course instructor to discuss progress and review submitted documents. Once the necessary analysis and design calculations are completed, then the individual sections will be written and revised iteratively until the course instructor agrees that the document is ready for defense. 

## Technological and Communication Requirements
Each student must have the following technology requirements:
- A personal computer with educational version AutoCAD installed
- Microsoft office suite programs are optional, as many other editors such as Google Docs/Sheets, Overleaf (for LaTex editing), etc. in the cloud are available and free.
- A virtual private network (VPN) connection to the IUP's network for accessing library resources while physically not on the campus
- A coding environment (e.g., Visual Studio Code, Jupyter Notebook, Google Colab, etc.) for engineering computing, plotting and conducting statistical analysis if needed
- A quiet meeting room if an online presentation or meeting is scheduled
- The library computers and the computers in 144 Weyandt (Computational Chemistry Lab) are available in case students need those for specific software programs. 

### D2L
While each student must complete his or her work independently, the D2L site is available for obtaining general guidance and resources. It is also a place where students must submit their weekly minute papers, drafts of captone design sections, and the final design report by the due dates for the course instructor to review. 

## Required Readings and Supplementary Materials
Students need to refer to the textbooks that were required by other ENVE core courses. Supplementary materials are project-specific and will be given by your project advisor. 

## Description and Assessment of Assignments
The course instructor has developed a work schedule with specific deliverables for each phase. The due dates of the phases are outlined in the "Tentative Schedule" section. Weekly meetings are to discuss student submittals. 

## Grading Breakdown

|Percent|Grading Items|
|-|-|
|16%|Weekly Minute Papers ($\times$8, 2% each)|
|30%|Capstone Design Project Sections - First Drafts ($\times$3, 10% each)|
|40%|Capstone Design Project - Final Report|
|14%|Design Report Defense|
|100%||

Letter grades will be given based on the weighted average specified above and assigned as follows: A $\ge$ 90%, B 80-89%, C 70-79%, D 60-69%, F<60%, and N (Refer to [IUP N grade policy](https://www.iup.edu/registrar/faculty/verification-of-attendance-n-grade/)). 

To satisfy the requirements of a writing-intensive course, written assignments are the major part of the final grade (86%). Each weekly minute paper should be 1 page long, updating the course instructor the progress on the project. There are 8 weekly minute paper submissions through this semester. The weekly minute paper will be graded by the amount of quality of work that is done during that week, and it does not require revisions. However, the individual sections of the capstone design project need to be revised iteratively until the course instructor agrees that the document is ready for defense. Each section (minimum 8 pages long) submitted during the semester is graded based on the quality of the first draft. The final design report is graded based on the overall quality of the work. ***All students must present their designs at the Environmental Engineering Day that is tentatively scheduled on Wednesday April 27***. 

## Meeting Hours
***Monday 5:00-7:50 pm (149 Weyandt)***
Group and/or individual meetings are held during this time and in this classroom. Each individual meeting typically takes around 30 minutes. You need to discuss with the course instructor about your allocated time. You must attend the meetings to avoid significant point loss. 

## Course Instructor
***H. Larry Tang, Ph.D., P.E.***
139 Weyandt Hall, 724-357-7925, htang@iup.edu

***Office Hours:*** 
M 7:50P-8:50P (in-person only)
T 3:35P-4:50P (zoom and in-person), 7:50P-8:50P (in-person only)
W 10:00A-11:15A (zoom and in-person), 4:50P-5:20P (in-person only)

Zoom Room ID: **910 636 5162**
Zoom link: [http://iupvideo.zoom.us/j/9106365162](http://iupvideo.zoom.us/j/9106365162)

## Tentative Schedule

|Week|Date|Tasks and Due Dates of Writings|
|-|-|-|
|1|1/17|MLK Holiday, No Class|
|2|1/24|Meet with advisor; Prepare work schedule (1st minute paper due 1/30)|
|3|1/31|Begin technical work (2nd minute paper due 2/6)|
|4|2/7|Continue technical work (3rd minute paper due 2/13)|
|5|2/14|Continue technical work (4th minute paper due 2/20)|
|6|2/21|Complete first draft of Section 1 for the instructor's review (due 2/27)|
|7|2/28|Revise Section 1 (5th minute paper due 3/6)|
|8|3/7|Complete first draft of Section 2 for the instructor's review (due 3/20)|
|9|3/14|Spring Break, No Class|
|10|3/21|Revise Section 2 (6th minute paper due 3/27)|
|11|3/28|Complete first draft of section 3 for the instructor's review (due 4/3)|
|12|4/4|Revise Section 3 (7th minute paper due 4/10)|
|13|4/11|Complete the final design report; Submit the draft for the instructor's review (due 4/17)|
|14|4/18|Revise the final design report (8th minute paper due 4/24)|
|15|4/25|Obtain approval for defense; Prepare for the defense at the Environmental Engineering Day (4/27)|
|16|5/2|Final revisions and upload final design report|

## Academic Integrity
The IUP Undergraduate Catalogue discussesl academic integrity and honesty, and outlines procedures and penalties for violations of IUP policy. If you are caught cheating or assisting someone in cheating, you will receive a 0% on that activity and will not be allowed to make up that activity. 

## Title IX Statement
Indiana University of Pennsylvania and its faculty are committed to assuring a safe and productive educational environment for all students. In order to meet this commitment and to comply with Title IX of Education Amendments of 1972 and guidance from the Office of Civil Rights, the University requires faculty members to report incidents of sexual violence shared by students to the University's Title IX Coordinator. The only exceptions to the faculty member's reporting obligation are when incidents of sexual violence are communicated by a student during a classroom discussion, in a writing assignment for a class, or as part of a University-approved research project. Faculty members are obligated to report sexual violence or any other abuse of a student who was, or is, a child (a person under 18 years of age) when the abuse allegedly occurred to the Department of Human Services (1-800-932-0313) and University Police (724-357-2141). Information regarding the reporting of sexual violence and the resources that are available to victims of sexual violence is set forth at: [http://www.iup.edu/socialequity/policies/title-ix](http://www.iup.edu/socialequity/policies/title-ix). 
